[Music]
Nations can survive conflicts and
sanctions, but not empty rivers. All
across Iran, lakes are vanishing,
aquifers are drying up, and rivers are
turning to sludge. Put simply, the
country is running out of water. Nowhere
is this collapse more symbolic or more
tragic than in Isvahan. Once the center
of a flourishing culture and long
admired for its architecture, commerce,
and fine art, Isvahan now faces a slow
motion death. The Zion Darude, literally
meaning life-giving river, is now well
lifeless. At times, the flow drops to
near zero for months on end. Water meant
for the river and city is routinely
siphoned to politically connected
agricultural and industrial ventures.
This steel plant alone, for instance,
belonging to the Moarak Steel Company,
uses around 210 million cubic meters
annually. That's nearly 40% of the total
water consumed in the provinces of
Isvahan, Yazd, and Kerman combined.
Reckless, yes, but not an isolated case.
Rather than changing course, the
government is doubling down on
unsustainable programs with no
ecological oversight. The outcome is
impossible to miss. Wetlands have dried
up, farmland is collapsing, the ground
itself is sinking, and unemployment is
spreading. If left unchecked, the crisis
will hit the southern and central
populations hardest, where water
shortages are at their worst. By 2050,
millions may be forced to move north in
search of water, deepening the country's
ethnic fault lines. By any measure,
Iran's water crisis is artificial. It is
the result of overuse and negligence by
the very institutions that claim to
protect the country. But nature cannot
be cheated. Every river and lake keeps
its own ledger. And just as water shapes
geopolitics, so do critical minerals.
That's why today's sponsor, Resolution
Minerals, is so relevant. See the ticker
on screen. Since America can't fight
wars with Chinese metals, Resolution
Minerals is advancing projects with some
of the highest grade antimony, tungsten,
gold, and silver in the United States.
These aren't just any rocks, by the way.
Antimony is critical for armor-piercing
ammo and explosives. Tungsten goes into
tank armor, artillery, shells and
missiles, and silver powers,
electronics, and targeting systems. With
grades proven in past wars and a $225
million Australian dollar takeover bid
even before new drilling, Resolution
Minerals could be the next perpetual
resources, which already secured $74
million in US defense funding. At under
$20 million market cap, this is an
asymmetric wartime investment play on
America's push for mineral independence
under Trump. Resolution Minerals is well
positioned to benefit from America's
drive for mineral independence. Check
out their ticker on the screen and learn
more by clicking the link in the
description. Just make sure to do your
own due diligence.
Iran is a dry country ranking fourth
globally for extreme water scarcity.
According to the World Resources
Institute, it stands on the verge of
what is called day zero, which is the
point when its water reserves run out
entirely. This looming threat is driven
not only by mismanagement, but by a
flawed philosophy of control. Despite
having laws to regulate water, Iranian
lawmakers from both the left and right
treat it not as a strategic resource,
but as something cheap and endlessly
exploitable. This top-down,
short-sighted approach has undermined
the country's institutions from applying
sustainable solutions. In fact, in Iran,
there's a word for it, the water mafia,
which refers to a powerful network of
ministers, corporate CEOs, and IRGC
lobbyists who manipulate regulations to
line their pockets. At the heart of this
network is the Iran Water and Power
Resources Development Company or IWPC
for short. This is the state contractor
responsible for dams and interbasin
transfers. And since the 1990s, IWPC
officials have become key players in the
water mafia. They are responsible for
the programs that have pushed the
country's ecosystems to the brink. But
surrounding that network is a broader
circle of experts, engineers, academics,
and bureaucrats. They are accompllices
who profit politically, professionally,
and financially from mega projects built
with little ecological oversight. And so
the reality is that the water mafia is
deeply ingrained in Iran's civil
service. The hallmark of their programs
has been a frenzy of dam constructions.
In 2012, Iran had 316 dams. By 2018,
that number had jumped to 647.
A year later, officials announced plans
for more than 100 new dams, many without
environmental assessments. The
consequences have been severe. The Latan
Dam, once one of Tyrron's primary
drinking water sources with a capacity
of 95 million cubic meters, now holds
barely 9 million. Other major dams,
including those in Minab, Zander, and
Save have also fallen to critical lows.
Iran's political and profit-driven dams,
river diversions and uncontrolled
agricultural expansions have ravaged its
ecosystems, created chronic shortages,
and displaced millions. In desperation,
Iranian farmers have turned to overping
underground aquifers, often illegally.
These are waters that take centuries,
even millennia to replenish, but they
are being drained at a pace the land
cannot sustain. Iran now has some
660,000
legal wells and another 360,000 illegal
ones, all draining its groundwater
reserves. These reserves once totaled
about 500 billion cub m, but up to 70%
have been depleted as of today. Annual
replenishment from rainfall and
infiltration adds only around 45 billion
cubic meters, but the country extracts
nearly three times that amount each
year. Plus, Iran is now in its fifth
consecutive year of drought. So, even
that limited recharge is not always a
given. The emphasis on farmers is key to
the story. Agriculture alone accounts
for about 90% of Iran's water use,
mainly because traditional methods waste
enormous amounts of it. For instance,
near Lake Ur, IWPC approved companies,
particularly those tied to the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, have seized
land for high water consumption farming,
such as watermelon cultivation.
Producing a single kilogram of
watermelon requires about 150 L of
water. Yet, the crop sells cheaply in
the Iranian market too cheaply. Put into
perspective, Iran is effectively giving
away its water as one of the cheapest
resources in the world. Schemes like
these only enrich faraway land holders
at the expense of local communities.
Lake Heria, meanwhile, has lost more
than 90% of its volume and now teeters
on the edge of ecological collapse. Yet,
instead of easing this burden, Thran has
doubled down on a policy of food
self-sufficiency.
Western sanctions reinforced by global
conflicts such as the war in Ukraine
have only deepened this policy by making
food security a strategic priority. Even
so, with its irresponsible and wasteful
programs, Iran squandered the very
resource it could least afford to lose.
[Music]
Iran's water crisis now touches nearly
every corner of the country, even
provinces once known for their greenery
like Yalan and Mazandaran. But the
central plateau east of the Zagros and
south of the Albert's mountains faces
the harshest conditions. To tackle the
water deficit, the government has
resorted to re-engineering geography
itself. Large-scale interbasin transfer
projects now divert water from one
watershed to another in the hope of
easing shortages. Chief among these are
seawater to desalination transfer
systems with plans for five major
pipelines designed to move desalinated
water from the Persian Gulf and the Gulf
of Oman to provinces across the country.
The first, a 826 km pipeline already
delivers
180 million cubic meters per year to
Keran and Yazd, supplying major copper
and iron mines. The second running
parallel is under construction to carry
an additional 200 million cubic meters
annually. Meanwhile, the third one
nearly finished will divert water to
Isvahan with most of it earmarked for
industrial use. The fourth pipeline
still underway will transfer water north
to Sistan Baluchasan and the Korasan
provinces while the fifth one in its
early stages is intended to supply fars.
Together these five pipelines provide
short-term relief by supplying
industries and households in water
stressed regions. However, desalination
is costly and energyintensive. two
resources Thran can scarcely afford. So
at best these water pipelines buy time,
but they don't resolve the core issues.
In fact, the pipelines may very well
backfire. Previous interbasin transfers
have only fueled ethnic tensions and
pitted communities against one another.
The fallout has been most visible in
regions like Kuzastan and Chahar
Mahalbaktiari
where government-led transfers and
industrial priorities have devastated
local livelihoods. In Kustan, for
instance, water has been diverted to
sustain sugar cane plantations and steel
factories. While in Chahar Mahal
Baktiari, farmers have watched their
rivers rerouted to feed cities like
Isvahan and Yazd. Both these provinces
have seen protests over these very
issues. Still worse, Kuzastan and Chahar
Mahal baktiari are home to ethnic
minorities such as Arabs, lurs and
others. So by diverting water from
minority regions to Persian majority
provinces, Thran fuels mistrust among
its multithnic communities. Water
scarcity therefore could quickly turn
into a divisive force and deepen
resentment between minority and majority
groups. In the long run, this dynamic
risks fraying the social fabric of Iran,
even if
ethnic lures now accuse the Persian
majority
of plundering their water. In Kuzastan,
Arab communities charged the government
with trying to replace them with lures.
Meanwhile, in West Azerbaijan, where
both Azarbaanis and Kirks live, the
collapse of Lake Oria has become a
source of ethnic friction. Most
recently, in March 2025, thousands of
Azerbaijanis took to the streets to
protest against the influx of Kurdish
migrants into their province. If Iran's
water crisis is left unchecked, these
types of grievances will proliferate and
steadily eat away at the country's
social unity. In the coming years, as
farmland dries up and rural life becomes
unsustainable, people will be forced to
leave their homes in central and
southern Iran and migrate north in
search of better living conditions.
Iranian analysts and even officials warn
that if the water crisis continues,
millions could be displaced in the next
two decades, which would fuel
interethnic tensions across the country.
All this shows that drought does more
than wither crops. It redraws the
borders within.
I've been your host Shivan from Caspian
Report. If you approve of what we do,
please leave a comment, hit the like
button, and mayhaps share the video. In
any case, thank you for your time and s
[Music]